---
ID: 111
post_title: legal
author: Alex
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: >
  https://www.audiocontentanalysis.org/legal/
published: true
post_date: 2012-06-16 20:01:34
---
<strong>contact</strong>
Alexander Lerch
e-mail:     info [at] AudioContentAnalysis.org
internet:   <a href="http://www.alexanderlerch.com">alexanderlerch.com</a>

<strong>disclaimer</strong>
Your use of this site is at your own risk. This site (including all content and functions made available on or accessed through this site) is provided "as is". To the fullest extent permissible by law, with regard to the content on this site, the author makes no representations or warranties of any kind whatsoever (1) for the accuracy, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement of any content published on or available through the site; (2) that the server that makes this site available is free of viruses or other components that may infect, harm, or cause damage to your computer equipment or any other property when you access, browse, download from, or otherwise use the site.

This Internet site contains links to external sites which are not under the control of the author. Therefore we are not responsible for the contents of any linked site. The author is providing these links to you only as a convenience, and the inclusion of any link does not imply endorsement by the author of the linked site.

This website uses Google Analytics, a web analytics service provided by Google, Inc. (“Google”). Google Analytics uses “cookies”, which are text files placed on your computer, to help the website analyze how users use the site. The information generated by the cookie about your use of the website (including your IP address) will be transmitted to and stored by Google on servers in the United States . Google will use this information for the purpose of evaluating your use of the website, compiling reports on website activity for website operators and providing other services relating to website activity and internet usage. Google may also transfer this information to third parties where required to do so by law, or where such third parties process the information on Google's behalf. Google will not associate your IP address with any other data held by Google. You may refuse the use of cookies by selecting the appropriate settings on your browser, however please note that if you do this you may not be able to use the full functionality of this website. By using this website, you consent to the processing of data about you by Google in the manner and for the purposes set out above.